# Getting Started With Apache Airflow

Installation of airflow is simple, you can find installation details for airflow on the official website [airflow.apache.org](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/stable/start.html) here we shall describe the installation steps for getting ready your development environment specifically for mini-BRS, later we shall describe the process of installation of airflow for mini-BRS on servers.

### Getting Started For Development

> **Prerequisite:** Linux OS, Although any Linux distro would work we prefer Debian distros e.q Ubuntu, Debian etc.  

>For **Red Hat** Linux the process of installation would remain same with slight changes specific to the use of corresponding package manager

>**Windows:** If you are a windows user and you want to run Apache Airflow on windows platform, you would need extra housekeeping, For windows platform, you would need a Virtual Machine simulator like *VirtualBox* / *VMware* for running Linux on Windows or if you are using Windows 10 then you can use the **Windows Sub System For Linux** to have your airflow installed. In any case, the internet is yours go and find it :wink:  

### Steps

It's good to have your ``workspace`` defined when you are working on multiple projects. we would start by defining a workspace for airflow projects and then create new airflow projects inside this workspace. Every project will be an independent installation with a python virtual environment configured for itself, with this we will be able to maintain separation of concern. without further ado let's get started...

1.  create a workspace in your ``home`` directory, simply create a *folder* named ``airflow_workspace``, it's this folder which is going to hold our airflow projects. In Linux simply issue the following command in you ``bash terminal`` with current working directory (``cwd``) as your ``home`` directory.

```bash
~$ mkdir airflow_workspace
```

2. Now, you have your workspace defined, let's now fetch the project from the ``GitLab`` repository. In order to fetch ``mini-BRS`` project from GitLab, you need to have ``git`` installed in your machine. To check if ``git`` is installed, run the below command in your terminal

```bash
~$ git version
```

The output should be something like this :

```bash
git version 2.17.0
```

The version number may differ depending on your machine and time of installation. If the output display's version number that means you have ``git`` installed.

In case, ``git`` is not installed. you can install it by the following command

```bash
~$ sudo apt-get install git
```

Once ``git`` is installed, you can fetch the project from the GitLab repo using below command.

make sure your ``cwd`` is your workspace i.e ``airflow_workspace``

```bash
~$ git clone https://gitlab.com/shahbaz.ali/vf-leap.git
```

3. Now, change your directory to ``mini-BRS`` and enter the following command to create a virtual environment.

>make sure you are using python3.x and not python2.7

```bash
~$ python -m venv .env
```

or 

```bash
~$ python -m virtualenv .env
```

In case, python throws no module ``virtualenv`` found, you need to install the ``virtualenv`` package, to install ``virtualenv`` package use below command

```bash
~$ pip install virtualenv
```
or

```bash
~$ pip3 install virtualenv
```

Now, you have a virtual environment ready for installing the project dependencies :sunglasses: 

4. Before installing the dependencies you need to activate your virtual environment and also set a ``PATH`` variable with the name ``AIRFLOW_HOME`` it's necessary for your ``airflow`` to find the project files. Let's do it one by one .

* with ``mini-BRS`` as your ``cwd`` hit the below command in terminal

```bash
~$ pwd
```
This will give you an output something like this

```
/home/shahbaz/airflow_workspace/mini-BRS
```

copy this output as we need it to set our ``PATH`` variable

* Now use the following command to open an editor

```bash
~$ nano .env/bin/activate
```
This will open a bash script, scroll to the end of the file and paste the following lines at the end of the file

>**make sure you change the value to your specific path that was generated earlier
```bash

#This is for AIRFLOW usage
export AIRFLOW_HOME=/home/shahbaz/airflow_workspace/mini-BRS
```

press CTRL+X and y, to close the editor

* You are ready to activate your virtual environment. enter the following command to activate it

```bash
~$ source .env/lib/activate
```

5. To install project dependencies, we prefer installation using ``requirement.txt`` file. In ``airflow-tdms`` project folder you have a file ``requirement.txt`` which has all the project dependencies list in it. enter the following command to install ``airflow`` and other dependent packages

```bash
~$ pip3 install -r requirement.txt
```
6. Once all the dependencies are installed, its time to initialize your ``airflow`` meta-database

```bash
~$ airflow initdb
```

7. Once you have initialized your airflow db, you can start airflow webserver and scheduler

```bash
~$ airflow webserver
```


```bash
~$ airflow scheduler
```









